DOCS-3472: Add documentation for Viam Apps (#4335)
viamrobotics/docs: docs/operate/control/viam-applications.md

## Requirements

{{< expand "Install the Viam CLI and authenticate." >}}
Install the Viam CLI using the option below that matches your system architecture:

{{< readfile "/static/include/how-to/install-cli.md" >}}

Then authenticate your CLI session with Viam using one of the following options:

{{< readfile "/static/include/how-to/auth-cli.md" >}}

{{< /expand >}}

## Build a custom web interface

You can build a custom web interface to access your machines using your preferred framework like React, Vue, Angular, or others.

### Access machines from your application

When logging into a Viam application and selecting a machine to use it with, the machine's API key is stored as a cookie.
You can access the data from your browser's cookies as follows:

```ts {class="line-numbers linkable-line-numbers" data-line=""}
import Cookies from "js-cookie";

let apiKeyId = "";
let apiKeySecret = "";
let host = "";
let machineId = "";

// Extract the machine identifier from the URL
const machineCookieKey = window.location.pathname.split("/")[2];
({
  apiKey: { id: apiKeyId, key: apiKeySecret },
  machineId: machineId,
  hostname: host,
} = JSON.parse(Cookies.get(machineCookieKey)!));
```

> For developing your application on localhost, run the following command which will proxy your local app to a machine for testing:

Reviewer: we should also mention that it will bypass the login page and the machine picker page. It will go straight to `/machine/<machineHostname>` for the machine provided with `--machine-id`

{{< tabs >}}
{{% tab name="Template" %}}

```sh {class="command-line" data-prompt="$" data-output="2-10"}

> viam module local-app-testing --app-url http://localhost:<PORT> --machine-id <MACHINE-ID> --machine-api-key <MACHINE-API-KEY> --machine-api-key-id <MACHINE-API-KEY-ID>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
viam module local-app-testing --app-url http://localhost:<PORT> --machine-id <MACHINE-ID>
```

1. Your application is rendered with access to the selected machine.
   The credentials for that one machine are provided in the cookies.

## Example

<!-- For a TypeScript example see [Monitor Air Quality with a Fleet of Sensors](/tutorials/control/air-quality-fleet/). -->

For a React application that shows camera feeds for a machine, see [Viam Camera Viewer](https://github.com/viam-labs/viam-camera-viewer).

## Limitations

- Applications currently only support single-machine applications.
- All modules with applications must have public visibility.
- The page will always render the latest version.
- Browsers with cookies disabled are not supported.
- Viam applications serve static files.
  If you are building an application with server-side rendering or need other back-end capabilities, Viam applications is not the right choice.

## Security considerations

- Customer applications are stored publicly on the internet, so avoid uploading sensitive information in your application code or assets.
- API keys and secrets are stored in the browser's cookies.
- Users authenticate with FusionAuth.

## FAQ

> ### Can I use a custom domain?

Reviewer 2: @NickPPC can you re-review this part?

## Requirements

{{< expand "Install the Viam CLI and authenticate." >}}
Install the Viam CLI using the option below that matches your system architecture:

{{< readfile "/static/include/how-to/install-cli.md" >}}

Then authenticate your CLI session with Viam using one of the following options:

{{< readfile "/static/include/how-to/auth-cli.md" >}}

{{< /expand >}}

## Build a custom web interface

You can build a custom web interface to access your machines using your preferred framework like React, Vue, Angular, or others.

### Access machines from your application

When logging into a Viam application and selecting a machine to use it with, the machine's API key is stored as a cookie.
You can access the data from your browser's cookies as follows:

```ts {class="line-numbers linkable-line-numbers" data-line=""}
import Cookies from "js-cookie";

let apiKeyId = "";
let apiKeySecret = "";
let host = "";
let machineId = "";

// Extract the machine identifier from the URL
const machineCookieKey = window.location.pathname.split("/")[2];
({
  apiKey: { id: apiKeyId, key: apiKeySecret },
  machineId: machineId,
  hostname: host,
} = JSON.parse(Cookies.get(machineCookieKey)!));
```

> For developing your application on localhost, run the following command which will proxy your local app to a machine for testing:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For developing your application on localhost, run the following command which will proxy your local app.
The command will open a browser window and navigate to `http://localhost:8000/machine/<machineHostname>` for the machine provided with --machine-id. 
```

## Requirements

{{< expand "Install the Viam CLI and authenticate." >}}
Install the Viam CLI using the option below that matches your system architecture:

{{< readfile "/static/include/how-to/install-cli.md" >}}

Then authenticate your CLI session with Viam using one of the following options:

{{< readfile "/static/include/how-to/auth-cli.md" >}}

{{< /expand >}}

## Build a custom web interface

You can build a custom web interface to access your machines using your preferred framework like React, Vue, Angular, or others.

### Access machines from your application

When logging into a Viam application and selecting a machine to use it with, the machine's API key is stored as a cookie.
You can access the data from your browser's cookies as follows:

```ts {class="line-numbers linkable-line-numbers" data-line=""}
import Cookies from "js-cookie";

let apiKeyId = "";
let apiKeySecret = "";
let host = "";
let machineId = "";

// Extract the machine identifier from the URL
const machineCookieKey = window.location.pathname.split("/")[2];
({
  apiKey: { id: apiKeyId, key: apiKeySecret },
  machineId: machineId,
  hostname: host,
} = JSON.parse(Cookies.get(machineCookieKey)!));
```

> For developing your application on localhost, run the following command which will proxy your local app.

Reviewer 3: I think we should explicitly say that the user's app that they've developed should also have its own server running on its own port _in addition_ to this server being spun up by the Viam CLI and that this is what `--app-ul` is referring to; that was a key step that I (and @ohEmily) missed when testing this ourselves. Also, a "local development" header/subsection title might be nice?

## Example

<!-- For a TypeScript example see [Monitor Air Quality with a Fleet of Sensors](/tutorials/control/air-quality-fleet/). -->

For a React application that shows camera feeds for a machine, see [Viam Camera Viewer](https://github.com/viam-labs/viam-camera-viewer).

## Limitations

- Applications currently only support single-machine applications.
- All modules with applications must have public visibility.
- The page will always render the latest version.
- Browsers with cookies disabled are not supported.
- Viam applications serve static files.
  If you are building an application with server-side rendering or need other back-end capabilities, Viam applications is not the right choice.

## Security considerations

- Customer applications are stored publicly on the internet, so avoid uploading sensitive information in your application code or assets.
- API keys and secrets are stored in the browser's cookies.
- Users authenticate with FusionAuth.

## FAQ

### Can I use a custom domain?

Viam does not currently support using custom domains (for example: `www.mycustomdomain.com/machine/<machineHostname>`) to serve your Viam application.

> You can, however, redirect from your domain to your Viam application (`www.mycustomdomain.com/machine/<machineHostname>` -> `your-app-name_your-public-namespace.viamapplications.com/machine/<machineHostname>`).

Reviewer 3: I don't think we should reveal this to users atm because Viam Apps expects the domain to be structured a certain way. We extract `appname` and `orgnamespace` out of the domain `appname_orgnamespace.viamapplications.com` in order to know what files to serve the user,, we lose that vital information if a user has their own domain that does not adhere to this protocol. Also, I'm not 100% sure about this part, but the Viam Apps server might only be able to serve at the *.viamapplications.com and viamapplications.com hostnames- it's supposed to error out on anything else. I suspect this because of [this](https://github.com/viamrobotics/viam-apps/blob/main/vite.config.js#L5) line in the codebase.

Reviewer 3: Ah I see I missed the other comments about this. This is fine then as long as we avoid CNAME stuff! One caveat is the original viamapplications.com domain still displays in browser, but it's at least nice to not need it to route there

<img width="847" height="598" alt="Screenshot 2025-07-17 at 10 43 10 AM" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/7be56881-31ea-4440-8ed1-eaf35444f660" />

1. Your application is rendered with access to the selected machine.
   The credentials for that one machine are provided in the cookies.

## Example

<!-- For a TypeScript example see [Monitor Air Quality with a Fleet of Sensors](/tutorials/control/air-quality-fleet/). -->

For a React application that shows camera feeds for a machine, see [Viam Camera Viewer](https://github.com/viam-labs/viam-camera-viewer).

## Limitations

- Applications currently only support single-machine applications.
- All modules with applications must have public visibility.
- The page will always render the latest version.
- Browsers with cookies disabled are not supported.
- Viam applications serve static files.
  If you are building an application with server-side rendering or need other back-end capabilities, Viam applications is not the right choice.

## Security considerations

- Customer applications are stored publicly on the internet, so avoid uploading sensitive information in your application code or assets.
- API keys and secrets are stored in the browser's cookies.
- Users authenticate with FusionAuth.

## FAQ

### Can I use a custom domain?

> Viam does not currently support using custom domains (for example: `www.mycustomdomain.com/machine/<machineHostname>`) to serve your Viam application.
> You can, however, redirect from your domain to your Viam application (`www.mycustomdomain.com` -> `your-app-name_your-public-namespace.viamapplications.com`).
> You can set forwarding up with your DNS provider.
> 
> To configure an apex domain (`example.com`) and the `www` subdomain, set the following values:
> 
> <!-- prettier-ignore -->
> | Domain | DNS record type | DNS record name | DNS record value |
> | ------ | --------------- | --------------- | ---------------- |
> | `example.com` | `A` | `@` | `34.8.79.17` |
> | `example.com` | `ANAME` or `ALIAS` | `@` | `your-app-name_your-public-namespace.viamapplications.com` |
> | `www.examples.com` | `CNAME` | `SUBDOMAIN.example.com` | `your-app-name_your-public-namespace.viamapplications.com` |
> 
> To configure a subdomain, set the following values:
> 
> <!-- prettier-ignore -->
> | Domain | DNS record type | DNS record name | DNS record value |
> | ------ | --------------- | --------------- | ---------------- |
> | Subdomain (`www.examples.com` or `app.example.com`) | `CNAME` | `SUBDOMAIN.example.com` | `your-app-name_your-public-namespace.viamapplications.com` |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Viam does not currently support using custom domains (for example: `app.mycustomdomain.com/machine/<machineHostname>`) to serve your Viam application.
You can, however, redirect from your domain to your Viam application (`app.mycustomdomain.com` -> `your-app-name_your-public-namespace.viamapplications.com`).
You can configure a redirect (HTTP 301) on your web server or hosting provider from `app.mycustomdomain.com/*` to `your-app-name_your-public-namespace.viamapplications.com/*`. 

```
